if you're in the market for a new
wireless router most of the models
you'll find clearly support both 2.4 and
5 gigahertz wi-fi we talked about the
difference between these two things in
this video but there's still a burning
question why are we still using the 2.4
gigahertz band which is much slower than
the more modern five gigahertz band to
answer we reached out to our friend joel
crane and we'd like to thank him for his
contributions so at first glance 2.4
gigahertz seems inferior it has far less
available spectrum than five gigahertz
which means less bandwidth and more
interference from other devices and the
five gigahertz spans minimum connection
speed is six megabits per second
compared to just
one megabit per second for 2.4 these
minimum speeds are often deliberately
used for management overhead such as a
smartphone acknowledging to the router
that it did in fact receive a data
packet and devices that talk more slowly
consume more time on the channel further
limiting throughput so
what's the deal well first of all there
are still lots of client devices out
there that only support 2.4 gigahertz
old devices lower end gadgets and
internet of things or iot products are
notorious for this and as with many
things in life cost is a big driver
behind this as we've been making 2.4
gigahertz devices for a lot longer and
it's less complicated to stick a 2.4
gigahertz radio inside cheap electronics
by contrast 5 gigahertz radios nearly
always have a 2.4 gigahertz radio in
them as well to ensure backward
compatibility meaning that a 5 gigahertz
device is more complicated to
manufacture so even if the cost is only
a few cents more per unit that can
quickly add up to a lot of money if a
manufacturer is shipping millions of
smart doorbells or whatever and on the
subject of smart doorbells there just
isn't any reason for many iot devices to
use the 5 gigahertz band as the smart
light bulb in your bedroom for example
doesn't require an incredibly fast
connection to receive the command to
change from red to blue there's even a
practical advantage to this by placing
low bandwidth devices such as iot
products on your home network's 2.4
gigahertz band and everything else on
your 5 gigahertz band you can cut down
on interference and increase throughput
on your 4k streams and other more data
hungry operations that way however
some products that could actually
benefit from five gigahertz wi-fi
actually still don't have it you see
it's common for manufacturers of
products where connectivity isn't the
main focus to simply tell their
designers hey we want wi-fi in this
thing and the company will proceed to
order the cheapest radios they can find
that will simply work which often means
devices will end up with 2.4 only
support because the manufacturer doesn't
know any better you sometimes see this
with products like gym equipment where
the brand is more concerned about
ensuring that the pedals on the
elliptical don't collapse
rather than about whether the built-in
screen can deliver lag-free 1080p video
playback but there's another important
reason that doesn't have anything to do
with manufacturers being cheap and lazy
range although five gigahertz wi-fi has
many advantages 2.4 still beats it in
terms of range it can go farther and is
better at dealing with pesky obstacles
such as walls again this is important
for iot devices as well as industrial
applications meaning that not only is
2.4 gigahertz still popular for wi-fi
it's also still used for bluetooth and
smart home protocols such as zigbee the
last thing you want is for your smart
coffee maker to forget to start brewing
when you wake up simply because it's too
far from your router
a real modern tragedy so even though 2.4
gigahertz wi-fi has become less common
in certain situations
places like stadiums and conventions are
more frequently turning it off due to
interference its combination of cost
effectiveness range and backwards
compatibility means that it will still
have a home in our gadgets for quite
some time and older doesn't always mean
it's worse just ask finch from american
pie wow i'm old that's an ultimate
reference
if you're running a small business
you've got to check out freshbooks it's
a cloud accounting solution specifically
built for small businesses you can get
paid up to four days faster with
freshbooks and create and send
professional invoices in just 30 seconds
setting up online payments is a breeze
and you can even see when your client
has seen your invoice to put an end to
the guessing games and right now
freshbooks is offering an unrestricted
30-day free trial so just go to
freshbooks.com techwiki and enter
techwiki in the how did you hear about
us section so thanks for watching guys
if you like this video get subscribed
give it a thumbs up and be sure to hit
us up in the comments with your
suggestions for videos that we should
cover in the future